Early charge cards and coins
Beginning in the late 19th century, charge cards came in various shapes and sizes, made of celluloid, copper, aluminum, steel, and other types of whitish metals.[10] Some were shaped like coins, with a little hole enabling them to be put on key rings. These charge coins were usually given to customers who had charge accounts in hotels or department stores. Each had a charge account number, along with the merchant's name and logo.

By imprinting the coin onto the sales slip, the charge card and charge coin offered a convenient way to copy the identifying information of a charge account.[11][12] The Charga-Plate, developed by Farrington Manufacturing Company[13] in 1928, was an early predecessor of the credit card and was used in the U.S. from the 1930s to the late 1950s. It was a 2+1⁄2-by-1+1⁄4-inch (64 mm × 32 mm) rectangle of sheet metal embossed with the customer's name, city, and state which held a small paper card on its back for a signature. In recording a purchase, the plate was laid into a recess in the imprinter with a paper charge slip and inked ribbon on top, which were pressed together to record the imprint.[14] Charga-Plates were issued by large-scale merchants to their regular customers, much like later department store credit cards. In some cases, the plates were kept in the issuing store rather than held by customers. When an authorized user made a purchase, a clerk retrieved the plate from the store's files and then processed the purchase. Charga-Plates sped up bookkeeping and reduced manual copying errors.

Air Travel Card
In 1934, American Airlines and the Air Transport Association simplified the process even more with the advent of the Air Travel Card.[15] They created a numbering scheme that identified the issuer of the card as well as the customer account. With an Air Travel Card, passengers could "buy now, and pay later" for a ticket against their credit and receive a fifteen percent discount at any of the accepting airlines. By the 1940s, all of the major U.S. airlines offered Air Travel Cards that could be used on 17 different airlines. By 1941, about half of the airlines' revenues came through the Air Travel Card agreement. The airlines also offered installment payment plans to lure new travelers into purchasing airfare. In 1948, the Air Travel Card became the first internationally valid charge card within all members of the International Air Transport Association.[16]

Early general purpose charge cards
The concept of customers' paying different merchants using the same card was expanded in 1950 by Ralph Schneider and Frank McNamara, founders of Diners Club, to consolidate multiple cards. The Diners Club, which was created partially through a merger with Dine and Sign, produced the first "general purpose" charge card and required the entire bill to be paid with each statement. That was followed by Carte Blanche, and in 1958 by American Express, which created a worldwide charge card network.

Until 1958, no one had been able to successfully establish a revolving credit financial system in which a card issued by a third-party bank was generally accepted by a large number of merchants. All prior charge cards were issued by merchants, not banks, and were only accepted by a limited number of merchants who agreed to accept them. In 1958, Bank of America launched the BankAmericard in Fresno, California, which became the first successful program recognizable as a modern credit card.[17] This card solved the problem in which consumers did not want to use a card that few merchants would accept and merchants did not want to accept a card that few consumers used. Bank of America chose Fresno because 45% of its residents used their bank, and by sending a card to 60,000 Fresno residents at once, the bank was able to convince merchants to accept the card.[1] It was eventually licensed to other banks around the United States and then around the world. In 1976, all BankAmericard licensees united themselves under the common brand Visa. In 1966, the ancestor of MasterCard was born when a group of banks established Master Charge to compete with BankAmericard; it received a significant boost when Citibank merged its own Everything Card, launched in 1967, into Master Charge in 1969.

Early credit cards in the U.S. were mass-produced and mass-mailed, unsolicited, to bank customers who were thought to be low risk. However, according to LIFE, cards were "mailed off to unemployable people, drunks, narcotics addicts and to compulsive debtors," which Betty Furness, President Johnson's Special Assistant, compared to "giving sugar to diabetics."[18] These mass mailings were known as "drops" in banking terminology, and were outlawed in 1970 due to the financial chaos they caused. However, by the time the law came into effect, approximately 100 million credit cards had been dropped into the U.S. population. After 1970, only credit card applications could be sent unsolicited in mass mailings.

This system was computerized in 1973 under the leadership of Dee Hock, the first CEO of Visa, allowing reduced transaction time.[19] However, until always-connected payment terminals became ubiquitous at the beginning of the 21st century, many merchants accepted all charges, especially those below a threshold value or from known and trusted customers, without verifying them by phone. Books with lists of stolen card numbers were distributed to merchants who were expected in any case to check cards against the list before accepting them, as well as verify the signature on the charge slip against the one on the card. Merchants who failed to take the time to follow the proper verification procedures were liable for fraudulent charges, but because the procedures were cumbersome, merchants often skipped some or all of them and assumed the risk for smaller transactions.[citation needed]

The early credit card industry in the United States was characterized by regional monopolies. Several landmark anti-trust court cases, including the 1978 Supreme Court case Marquette National Bank of Minneapolis v. First of Omaha Service Corp., led to substantial reforms that made the credit card industry more competitive. A 2024 study estimated that these competitive reforms resulted in substantial welfare gains, in particular for the poor.[20]